# Git Definitions

**Instructions: ** Define each of the following Git concepts.

* What is version control?  Why is it useful?

The term 'version control' can be thought of as a category of software tools designed to manage changes to source code over a period of time.  It is used by software teams to organize all the modified code that is worked on.  This is especially helpful when a development team has multiple groups involved and as a result, the version control software could be a special database from which the code differences are tracked and capable of useful analysis.  This might take the form of retracing a source code problem and being able to fix this while not blocking access of code for other development team members.  In addition to being a source of code 'reserves', version control software has a pivotal efficiency role to play.  Teams that divide the collective software goal into more manageable parts greatly benefit if their version control can prevent conflicts that arise or other sources of new bugs that accompany such development tactics.  In effect, changes and necessary testing could progress along the development cycle nearly in sync.  The utility in being able to continuously build on the code, repair problems, and likewise, smoothly modify as needed all while having a protective element makes version control quite an essential skillset to foster.


* What is a branch and why would you use one?

In line with the goals of version control, Git branches are a way of organizing code development in as accurate a historical record as possible.  Branches achieve this by representing an 'offshoot' line of development from the preceding code source.  Thus, within it, the project can be further abstracted, edited, and may ultimately be staged onward to 'commits'.  This act of encapsulation is vital for code as it cannot limit development teams from using a source of code to progress into very large concepts or even the smallest of features.  Employing branches helps simultaneous development to occur.  They also serve as the 'roadmap' in piecing the history of 'commits' and greatly demonstrate this when a series of 'commits' is followed.  As a result, it would be wrong to think of branches as being a container for the 'commits' because what actually takes place is the 'commit' being pointed at as the moment where a development offshoot had been created, selected as the current interface to "checkout", and then crystalized into a 'save point' with 'add' and 'commit' commands.  Being able to remain on this branch and develop the code for a dedicated goal does not end there.  Branches provide a way to experiment in several offshoots on that code while not risking an important source code sample.  As is needed, these branches can be pointed at and determined as targets for merging into compatible and likely more feature-rich code.


* What is a commit? What makes a good commit message?

A commit is akin to creating a 'save point' on a code piece that is being modified.  This idea ties in with the reason why version control software is useful.  As a piece of code is accessed with the intent of modification, the programmer may or may not succeed on a desired outcome or could find that the original code conflicts with a discovered solution that improves the main software goals but is incompatible.  In the former situation, the original code source can be preserved by choosing not to use the Git Workflow process of 'add' and 'commit'.  By omitting this set of commands, within the repository, that code source will be unmodified.  Steps to then code for an alternative solution could proceed and if this proceeds to a desired code update, then the 'commit' process should be taken as a way to crystalize this new 'save point'.  In the latter example, the process of writing code seemed to offshoot a worthy code sample for further exploration towards software goals.  It may still be beneficial to have the original source code as it could be useful to analyze how better ideas were crafted.  The programmer may then choose to create another file name via 'add' and then have this stored in a 'save state' by using 'commit'.  The tracking that comes with version control can then document how these code pieces compare, contrast, and otherwise evolved.  Thus, it is best to provide sufficient details in the 'commit' message when this process is undertaken.  Along with the other parts that accompany commit logs (unique ID, author, and timestamp) the description is a detailed account that should state what was changed since the last commit.  The message convention should be an active declaration of what this 'save state' is doing now, in the present tense, mindful to using an active leading verb.


* What is a merge conflict?

Regarding use in Git, think of the act of "merging" as integrating another branch into your current working branch.  If you separate thinking these branches as two different and individual contexts, it is easier to conceptualize why this is needed.  As is with the version control dynamic, working on code in an alternate context can help prevent the original source of code from being lost.  Eventually, if the work on the branch produces a more desirable code result from which to take the progress onward, then a merging event can be done.  The times when Git has merging issues, or merge conflicts, occur when Git cannot know what is correct among two code sources that may differ slightly (such as lines of code where two different persons changed those same lines) or differ vastly (such as one source with a deleted code part and the complement having retained it but with modifications).